# Sorting Herbarium Data

## Introduction

I am conducting a meta-analysis that explores shifts in flowering periods of angiosperms deriving from both wet and dry habitats of every major landmass at tropical latitudes. Both wet and dry habitats are threatened by climate change, however dry climates are oftentimes at greater risk despite the emphasis on wet habitats by most media outlets and conservation initiatives. I specifically predict that because of their sensitivities to changes in precipitation, dry forests will experience  more drastic changes in timing of flowering events. This hypothesis will be tested using resulting data.
Representative study sites have been delimited on every major landmass, in a pairwise format. Locations were chosen based on their likelihood of having an abundance of herbarium specimens from diverse lineages and herbarium specimens that span long enough time periods, as well as a history of minimal human disturbance; as such, the majority of selected sites derive from field research stations. 
 Digitized specimen records are being collected from online databases, primarily GBIF, and supplemented by numerous others such as iDiGBiO, Symbiota, and NYBG’s Starr Herbarium. However, I would explicitly like to utilize specimens from smaller herbaria that are not yet digitized, preferably those herbaria local to the study region. Doing so would make a more robust dataset, while concomitantly giving voice to these institutions and help to advocate for new funding. 
Development of my minimum criteria (for inclusion of a species or set of species into my study) was guided by reviewing existing literature on using herbarium specimens to understand the effects of climate change. These criteria require that each prospective study site hosts a minimum of thirty species, each with a minimum of thirty specimens per species, and these collected over a minimum of a fifty year time span. As of now, data have been collected from online databases including large aggregator databases (e.g., GBIF, iDigBio) and are being examined to determine which elements meet my criteria.  I have chosen a minimum of 30 species per prospective study site, and data from these species will reveal the nuances of flowering period in many such locations. 

##Summary of Data

The goal of this independent project is to take my data that I have amassed from public sites such as GBIF and iDigBio and make it usable for the stats that I wish to conduct with it. I need to isolate the data that meets my criteria of a minimum of 30 species, 30 specimens each, collected over 50 years for each location. I also need to clean up the data to make it usable and ready for the ridiculously complicated stats that I need to do with it. 

I am using Herbarium data, which is in Darwin Core format. That means it’s a mess. There are catalog numbers, coordinates, names of collectors, collection codes, multiple dates, and a whole mess of other information, both numeric, characters and symbols. This will make it incredibly difficult to input, especially because there are around 55 columns, each with a different set of information, and possibly even slightly different formats within each column. I likely need to first isolate the columns I need, but be able to access the other data again at some point for the reduced data quality. I think I’m making sense but I might be making it very confusing. To make things even more confusing, the columns aren’t always in the same order for each data set. So for example the data from GBIF might have the date in column 3 and iDigBio might have it in column 5, so I can’t just use the column number. And the species name might be different too. One has it formatted “Genus species” in one column and the other might have each in a separate column. 

As for the size of the data, I have 45 data sets each with approximately 55 columns and 9000 rows each. This number may grow as I find more datasets. Ideally I’d like to figure out some code I can use for any dataset I come across, and formulate a nice easy protocol to be able to make my data usable for analysis. I don’t have any collaborators and no one else in my lab is working on this either. That being said I can push data to github no problem, especially because the original data is publicly available. 

##### All data is my own
